                                 Issues

Combating Climate Change to Save the Planet


     Right now, we have an energy policy that is rigged to boost
     the profits of big oil companies like Exxon, BP, and Shell
     at the expense of average Americans. CEO’s are raking in
     record profits while climate change ravages our planet and
     our people — all because the wealthiest industry in the
     history of our planet has bribed politicians into
     complacency in the face of climate change. Enough is enough.
     It’s time for a political revolution that takes on the
     fossil fuel billionaires, accelerates our transition to
     clean energy, and finally puts people before the profits of
     polluters.


                                         — Senator Bernie Sanders

                              The Problem

   Climate change is the single greatest threat facing our planet.
   The debate is over, and the scientific jury is in: global
   climate change is real, it is caused mainly by emissions
   released from burning fossil fuels and it poses a catastrophic
   threat to the long-term longevity of our planet. If we do
   nothing, the planet will heat up five to ten degrees Fahrenheit
   by the end of this century. That would cause enough sea level
   rise from melting glaciers to put cities like New York and
   Miami underwater – along with more frequent asthma attacks,
   higher food prices, insufficient drinking water and more
   infectious diseases.

   But this isn’t just a problem for the future – the impacts of
   climate change are apparent here and now. Whether it’s more
   intense forest fires on the West Coast, or more frequent
   hurricanes in the Gulf Coast, or damaging flash floods in
   California, climate change is here and it’s already causing
   devastating human suffering. The worst part is this: people who
   live in low-income and minority communities will bear the most
   severe consequences of society’s addiction to fossil fuels.

   This is every kind of issue all at once: the financial cost of
   climate change makes it an economic issue, its effect on clean
   air and water quality make it a public health problem, its role
   in exacerbating global conflict and terrorism makes it a
   national security challenge and its disproportionate impacts on
   vulnerable communities and on our children and grandchildren
   make acting on climate change a moral obligation. We have got
   to solve this problem before it’s too late.

                    Why Haven’t We Solved it Yet?

   Solving this should be straightforward. After all, the majority
   of Americans understand the seriousness of climate change, and
   they demand action. 97 percent of scientists agree about the
   urgent need to act and the vocal minority who don’t are bought
   and paid for by the fossil fuel industry. More and more
   countries around the world are beginning to do their part, by
   stepping up to significantly curb their use of fossil fuels to
   become part of the solution. If our democracy worked the way
   it’s supposed to, that would be enough – the debate would be
   over, the facts would be heard and lawmakers would obey the
   will of the people.

   But that’s where the billionaire class comes in. Instead of
   engaging on this issue in good faith and allowing democracy to
   play out, executives and lobbyists for coal, oil, and gas
   companies have blocked every attempt to make progress on
   climate change, and thrown unprecedented amounts of money at
   elected officials to buy their loyalty. Recent reporting even
   shows that executives at Exxon pioneered the research on
   climate change before anyone else did, but may have
   deliberately lied about it to spread disinformation and
   confusion to protect their bottom line. It’s eerily reminiscent
   of the fight over tobacco regulation, when executives from the
   tobacco companies repeatedly testified before Congress that
   cigarettes don’t cause cancer. Recently leaked internal
   documents show that even they knew they were lying.

   Let’s be clear: the reason we haven’t solved climate change
   isn’t because we aren’t doing our part, it’s because a small
   subsection of the one percent are hell-bent on doing everything
   in their power to block action. Sadly, they have deliberately
   chosen to put their profits ahead of the health of our people
   and planet.

                               The Future

     The debate is over. The vast majority of the scientific
     community has spoken. Climate change is real, it is caused
     by human activity, and it is already causing devastating
     harm here in the United States, and to people all around the
     globe. So what are we going to do about it? We will act
     boldly to move our energy system away from fossil fuels,
     toward energy efficiency and sustainable energy sources like
     wind, solar, and geothermal because we have a moral
     responsibility to leave our kids a planet that is healthy
     and habitable.


                                         — Senator Bernie Sanders

   Here’s the good news: our society is already moving in the
   right direction. Solar panels cost 80 percent less than they
   did in 2008 and they’re popping up on rooftops everywhere. In
   fact, nearly a full quarter of the world’s electricity today
   comes from clean, sustainable resources like the sun and wind.
   The leaders of the seven major industrialized nations,
   including the United States, agreed in the summer of 2015 to a
   long-term goal of phasing out fossil fuels entirely and moving
   to an economy powered entirely by clean energy sources like
   wind, solar and geothermal. We’re already transitioning to a
   clean energy economy – but scientists say we need to do it
   faster and we need to do it right.

   Doing it right means ensuring that workers have the skills,
   equipment, and training they need to succeed in a clean energy
   economy. It also means workers need to be able to organize and
   advocate for good wages and safe working conditions. Bernie
   knows these workers do some of the most important work in
   America and we need to ensure without a doubt that their
   livelihoods will be helped – not hurt – by the transition to
   clean energy. That’s why Bernie is introducing the Clean Energy
   Worker Just Transition Act to provide comprehensive benefits to
   workers as they transition to making the solar panels, wind
   turbines, and batteries of tomorrow.

   The key is to stop funding the problem by subsidizing fossil
   fuels and instead accelerate our path to progress by showcasing
   our American innovation to accelerate the transition. This is
   important, because the support of the American people can make
   an enormous difference. In the 60’s, President Kennedy set a
   goal that many said was impossible – but by the end of that
   decade, Neil Armstrong had successfully taken his giant leap
   for humanity. Our government needs to think that big today and
   commit to prioritizing the transition to an economy powered by
   more than 80 percent clean energy sources by 2050. That starts
   with simple, commonsense steps: instead of subsidizing massive
   fossil fuel corporations, we can create millions of jobs for
   working families by investing in clean energy. The answer is
   clear and affordable. The solutions are within our reach – we
   just need average Americans to come together to make it happen.

                               The Goals

   Bernie’s comprehensive plan to combat climate change and make
   sure our planet is habitable and safe for our kids and
   grandkids will:
     * Cut U.S. carbon pollution by 40 percent by 2030 and by over
       80 percent by 2050 by putting a tax on carbon pollution,
       repealing fossil fuel subsidies and making massive
       investments in energy efficiency and clean, sustainable
       energy such as wind and solar power.
     * Create a Clean-Energy Workforce of 10 million good-paying
       jobs by creating a 100% clean energy system. Transitioning
       toward a completely nuclear-free clean energy system for
       electricity, heating, and transportation is not only
       possible and affordable it will create millions of good
       jobs, clean up our air and water, and decrease our
       dependence on foreign oil.
     * Return billions of dollars to consumers impacted by the
       transformation of our energy system and protect the most
       vulnerable communities in the country suffering the ravages
       of climate change. Bernie will tax polluters causing the
       climate crisis, and return billions of dollars to working
       families to ensure the fossil fuel companies don’t subject
       us to unfair rate hikes. Bernie knows that climate change
       will not affect everyone equally – disenfranchised minority
       communities and the working poor will be hardest hit. The
       carbon tax will also protect those most impacted by the
       transformation of our energy system and protect the most
       vulnerable communities in the country suffering the ravages
       of climate change.

The Plan

      Reclaim our Democracy from the Billionaire Fossil Fuel Lobby

   The fossil fuel industry spends billions and billions of
   dollars lobbying and buying candidates to block virtually all
   progress on climate change. At the national level where
   companies have to report what they spend on lobbying and
   campaign contributions, the oil companies, coal companies and
   electric utilities spent a staggering $2.26 billion in federal
   lobbying since 2009 and another $330 million in federal
   campaign contributions. Even in Washington, that’s a lot of
   money.

   But that’s just the part we know about. Thanks to the
   disastrous Citizens United Supreme Court decision, the fossil
   fuel industry can pour unlimited amounts of money into the
   political system without having to disclose how much or where
   they spend it.

   So what does the fossil fuel industry get in exchange for all
   that money? They get friends who help them keep $135 billion
   dollars in tax subsidies and corporate welfare over the next
   decade. They write legislation to build the Keystone XL
   pipeline. They block efforts to move us beyond oil by blocking
   the development and deployment of clean, sustainable energy.

   This makes it harder to take action to fight climate change.
   But the solutions are possible. Together there is nothing we
   can’t achieve.

  As president, Bernie will:

     * Ban fossil fuels lobbyists from working in the White House.
       Massive lobbying and unlimited super PAC donations by the
       fossil fuel industry gives these profitable companies
       disproportionate influence on our elected leaders. This
       practice is business as usual in Washington and it is not
       acceptable. Heavy-handed lobbying causes climate change
       skepticism. It has no place in the executive office.
     * End the huge subsidies that benefit fossil fuel companies.
       When fossil-fuel companies are racking up record profits,
       it is absurd to provide massive taxpayer subsidies to pad
       their already enormous earnings. After all, it is immoral
       that some in Congress advocate harsh cuts in Medicare,
       Medicaid and Social Security while those same people vote
       to preserve billions in tax breaks for the most profitable
       corporations in America.
     * Create a national environmental and climate justice plan
       that recognizes the heightened public health risks faced by
       low-income and minority communities. Low-income and
       minority neighborhoods will continue to be the hardest hit
       if we don’t act to stop climate change now. Ten years ago,
       Hurricane Katrina decimated the Gulf Coast, flooding 80
       percent of the city of New Orleans. Some areas of the city
       were submerged in as much as 10 feet of water, and 28
       percent of residents had no way to leave the city. Almost
       100,000 African American residents who left New Orleans
       after Hurricane Katrina never returned. The reality of the
       impacts of the storm on the African American community in
       New Orleans exposed the broader trend that low-income and
       minority communities face the brunt of climate change
       impacts first and worst.
     * Bring climate deniers to justice so we can aggressively
       tackle climate change. It is an embarrassment that
       Republican politicians, with few exceptions, refuse to even
       recognize the reality of climate change, let alone are
       prepared to do anything about it. The reality is that the
       fossil fuel industry is to blame for much of the climate
       change skepticism in America. Bernie recently called for
       the Department of Justice to investigate Exxon Mobil, which
       may have not only known about the dangers of climate
       change, but has spent millions of dollars to spread doubt
       about the causes and impacts of burning fossil fuels.
     * Fight to overturn Citizens United. In a 5-4 decision in
       2010 in the Citizens United case, the Supreme Court opened
       the floodgates for corporations and the super wealthy to
       spend unlimited and undisclosed money to buy our elected
       officials. The Supreme Court essentially declared that
       corporations, including fossil fuel corporations, have the
       same rights as natural-born human beings. This decision has
       enabled billionaires and special interests to increasingly
       control the political campaign finance system, and amounts
       to legalized bribery.
    Bernie’s Record:
       Bernie introduced a constitutional amendment that prohibits
       for-profit corporations from making contributions or
       expenditures into political campaigns. In other words,
       Bernie’s amendment reaffirms what’s already in the
       Constitution: the right to vote belongs to people, and not
       corporate entities whose money is drowning out the rest of
       us.
     * Back legislation to publicly finance elections. Bernie
       wants to move toward public funding of elections to promote
       a more even playing field where anyone can run for office
       without having to beg for money from the wealthy and the
       powerful. Public funding of elections increases voter
       participation, helps lower the influence of outside money
       and lowers the amount of time politicians spend
       fundraising, allowing them to implement solutions, as they
       were elected to do. He envisions a future of inclusivity
       that would restore our American democracy by ensuring each
       citizen has equal power in determining the future leaders
       of our nation.

          Accelerate a Just Transition Away from Fossil Fuels

   Scientists warn us if we continue burning fossil fuels, we will
   experience cataclysmic change, in terms of more disease, more
   hunger, more drought, more famine, rising sea levels, more
   floods, more ocean acidification, more extreme weather
   disturbances and more human suffering. That means we must leave
   the vast majority of global reserves of coal, natural gas and
   oil in the ground.

    Bernie’s Record:

   Bernie recently co-sponsored the Keep It in the Ground Act to
   ban future fossil fuel leases on our public lands. His
   legislation would keep over 90 percent of the potential carbon
   emissions from fossil fuels on our federal lands and waters
   underground forever.

   IFRAME:
   [42]https://www.youtube.com/embed/ofMQXXVyDso?rel=0?&theme=ligh
   t

   Bernie believes we must transition away from fossil fuel
   consumption to prevent the worst impacts of climate change. But
   our transition away from fossil fuels must be fair to those
   currently working in the energy sector, which means those
   workers and their families must be able to depend on safe,
   living-wage jobs.

  As president, Bernie will:

     * Embrace a science-based standard for carbon pollution
       emissions reductions. We have a very limited window of time
       to transition away from fossil fuels toward clean energy
       for all Americans to prevent a global temperature increase
       that will cause cataclysmic impacts. Bernie knows that to
       maintain a safe and healthy planet for our kids and
       grandchildren we must listen to the scientists who say we
       must decrease carbon pollution emissions by at least 80
       percent from 1990 levels by 2050.
     * Put a price on carbon. Bernie agrees with leading
       economists on both ends of the political spectrum: a tax on
       carbon is one of the most straightforward and
       cost-effective strategies for quickly fighting climate
       change.
    Bernie’s Record:
       Bernie is introducing the gold standard climate change bill
       that will tax polluters causing the climate crisis and
       return billions of dollars to working families to ensure
       the fossil fuel companies don’t subject Americans to unfair
       rate hikes. The carbon tax will also protect low-income and
       minority communities that are most impacted by the
       transformation of our energy system and protect the most
       vulnerable communities in the country suffering the ravages
       of climate change.
     * Protect the health of our children. Kids are uniquely
       threatened by air pollution from sources like coal plants
       and oil refineries. Children’s lungs are more sensitive to
       air pollution than adults. Climate change exacerbates
       existing air pollution problems, which will only increase
       the health impacts on children, especially those with
       respiratory diseases like asthma. As a father of four and a
       grandfather of seven, Bernie cares about leaving clean air
       and a healthy, livable planet for all of our kids and
       grandchildren.
     * Create clean, domestic energy alternatives to power our
       cars and trucks. The transportation sector accounts for
       about 26 percent of carbon pollution emissions. We must
       move our transportation sector beyond oil by running our
       cars and trucks on electricity generated by solar and wind
       power. We need efficient public transportation, advanced
       renewable fuels and high-speed passenger and cargo rail.
     * Ban Arctic oil drilling. Bernie knows that drilling in the
       Arctic Circle and the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge at a
       time when we face a serious climate emergency is
       unthinkable. Research shows that drilling in the Arctic is
       inconsistent with efforts to prevent catastrophic global
       temperature increases. The Arctic National Wildlife Refuge,
       which spans 19.6 million acres in Alaska and boasts the
       greatest biodiversity of any protected area north of the
       Arctic Circle, is too precious to put at risk from the
       detrimental consequences of oil production and extraction.
     * Ban offshore drilling. If we are serious about moving
       beyond oil toward energy independence, lowering the cost of
       energy, combatting climate change and cutting carbon
       pollution emissions, then we must ban offshore drilling. If
       there is a lesson to be learned from the 2010 BP oil spill
       disaster, it is that Congress must not open new areas to
       offshore oil drilling.
     * Stop dirty pipeline projects like the Keystone XL. Back in
       August 2011, Bernie was the first national politician to
       publicly oppose Keystone XL, because he saw that it would
       move us in exactly the wrong direction, toward greater
       dependence on fossil fuels, specifically tar sands oil, but
       also on one of the dirtiest and most expensive fossil fuels
       imaginable. Bernie was again the first presidential
       candidate to oppose the Bakken oil pipeline that would
       cross Iowa and the first to oppose the Northeast Energy
       Direct Pipeline that would bring fracked natural gas
       through New Hampshire. We need to invest in clean energy
       infrastructure, not lock ourselves into long-term payments
       and significant carbon pollution emissions for pipelines
       that could cause disastrous oil spills.
     * Stop exports of liquefied natural gas and crude oil. The
       Department of Energy has found that exporting even half of
       the natural gas already approved for export could raise
       U.S. prices by up to 54 percent. Oil and natural gas
       exports must be in the interest of consumers, the economy,
       our manufacturing sector and national security – not merely
       the interest of fossil fuel companies’ bottom line.
       Especially while we still import oil, we should be
       transitioning toward clean, sustainable energy instead of
       incentivizing more extraction and consumption of fossil
       fuels.
     * Stand with Vermont and other states to ban fracking for
       natural gas. Fracking threatens our air and water. Disposal
       of wastewater from fracking causes earthquakes. Oklahoma
       became the number one place for earthquakes on Earth this
       year because gas companies inject fracking fluid back into
       the ground. Fracking is a large-scale industrial process
       that doesn’t belong in anyone’s backyard or deserve
       exemption from laws that protect the health of our
       children. That’s why communities all over the country from
       New York to California and Texas to Colorado have stood up
       to the oil and gas industry and said they don’t want
       fracking in their backyards. Bernie was very proud when
       Vermont became the first state to ban fracking. We have
       clean energy solutions to climate change, and fracking is
       not one of them.
     * Ban mountaintop removal coal mining and invest in
       Appalachian communities. Across the Appalachian Mountain
       Range, coal companies are blowing up entire mountaintops to
       get at the thin coal seams below. The communities in the
       region are paying for this destructive practice in their
       health, their culture and their natural heritage. Bernie is
       in staunch opposition to this dirty and damaging practice
       and believes we must invest in Appalachian communities to
       help them transition to a clean, prosperous, and healthy
       future.
     * Close the loopholes that allow the chemical, oil and gas
       industries to pollute our air and water. Bernie served as
       mayor of Burlington, Vermont, which sits on one of the
       largest freshwater lakes in the United States, Lake
       Champlain. Bernie understands the importance of clean water
       practices and recognizes how it impacts communities. The
       federal Clean Water Act and Clean Air Act have reduced
       pollution, but they are always under attack by polluters
       who put profits before the health of our children and
       grandchildren.
     * Increase fuel economy standards to 65 miles per gallon by
       2025. Recent fuel economy standards put us on track to
       reach 54.5 miles per gallon in 2025, which moves us in
       right direction, but still leaves us lagging behind the
       rest of the world. Japan is set to reach that level five
       years before us, and Europe will do even better, reaching
       over 65 miles per gallon by 2020. Bernie knows we can do
       more and make our cars internationally competitive by
       raising our fuel economy standards to 65 miles per gallon
       by model year 2025. This will save car owners money at the
       pump, cut carbon pollution emissions and create good-paying
       American jobs.
     * Protect public lands by promoting natural resource
       conservation and habitat preservation. Conservation of our
       public lands such as our National Parks and Forests are an
       American tradition and a vehicle for economic growth. Our
       conserved public land also serves an important role in not
       only preventing climate change but also in mitigating the
       catastrophic effects of climate change like floods,
       hurricanes and other extreme weather that have been
       increasing in frequency. Bernie is committed to ensuring
       that Americans have access to urban, suburban and rural
       recreational green space that are vital to our national
       heritage and our country’s tradition of recreation and
       conservation.

                 Investing in Clean, Sustainable Energy

   Choosing to lead the clean energy technology revolution to stop
   the worst effects of climate change means America will remain a
   worldwide leader in job creation, domestic manufacturing, local
   community revitalization and clean energy technology
   development and implementation.

   The solar industry is adding workers at a rate nearly 20 times
   faster than the overall economy. Solar industry employment has
   grown by 86 percent in the past five years, resulting in nearly
   80,000 domestic living-wage jobs.

   For every dollar invested in energy efficiency, families and
   businesses can enjoy up to $4 in energy savings, and for every
   billion dollars invested in energy efficiency upgrades we can
   create up to 7,000-8,000 new jobs, roughly ten times as many
   jobs as we would create from the same investments in coal.
   Investments in clean energy technologies will also keep jobs in
   America and prevent harm to the economy by preventing the worst
   impacts of climate change.

   Bernie strongly supports efforts to develop and deploy clean,
   sustainable energy technologies like energy efficiency, solar,
   wind and geothermal.

  As president, Bernie will:

     * Work toward a 100 percent clean energy system and create
       millions of jobs. Scientists tell us we have a short time
       to make an aggressive cut in our carbon pollution
       emissions. Transitioning toward a completely clean energy
       system for electricity, heating, and transportation is not
       only possible and affordable it will create millions of
       good jobs, clean up our air and water and decrease our
       dependence on foreign oil.
     * Invest in clean, sustainable energy sources powered by the
       sun, wind and Earth’s heat. Massive and sustained
       investment in clean energy technology development and
       implementation can get us where scientists tell us we need
       to be. It’s no great secret that clean energy technologies
       are a good investment. We actually get more energy out of
       the money invested in sustainable energy technologies than
       we do out of fossil fuel. Clean energy technology has no
       associated fuel costs, which means there are no price
       spikes like we see with oil and gas. The cost of deploying
       solar panels has gone down by more than 80 percent since
       2008, thanks to tax credits and federally funded research
       and development. Our national solar capacity will soon
       provide enough energy to power four million homes.
       Similarly, wind tax credits spurred the development of wind
       farms that now provide enough power for 16.7 million
       American homes. In fact, wind provided almost 30 percent of
       all new domestic power capacity in the last five years.
       Last year, nearly 30 percent of the electricity used in
       Iowa came from the wind. The decreasing cost of wind and
       solar demonstrates that we can have a 100 percent clean
       energy future.
     * Invest in advanced renewable fuels and keep our energy
       dollars at home. Renewable fuels have become a key
       component of our national strategy to move beyond oil in
       the fight against climate change. Renewable fuels must be
       produced in a way that achieves our environmental and
       energy security goals. We must both ensure that our
       renewable fuels production is truly sustainable, and we
       must also prevent the oil companies from derailing our
       progress in developing cleaner and more sustainable
       alternatives to gasoline and diesel. We should emphasize
       new, clean technologies like cellulosic ethanol and
       algae-based fuels. Advanced biofuels have enormous
       potential to deliver dramatic reductions in carbon
       pollution and strengthen rural economies, all while keeping
       our energy dollars here at home instead of sending them
       overseas to oil oligarchs in Russia and the Middle East.
     * Invest in solar energy and put money back in the pockets of
       consumers. Bernie believes that solar energy is one of the
       most promising sources of clean energy for America’s
       future. That’s why he supports making billions of dollars
       of investments in renewable energy, like solar. Bernie
       recently introduced the Low Income Solar Act to increase
       low-income families’ access to solar energy by making it
       more affordable for people who own their own home and
       incentivize access to community solar projects. Investing
       in solar energy is just as important for the economy as it
       is for the Earth. Bernie supports solar net metering, which
       means that people who invest in solar should be able to
       offset the cost – or in some cases even make money – on
       their electric utility bill. He recognizes that as we lower
       the cost of solar energy and increase our use of solar, we
       can create hundreds of thousands of good-paying
       manufacturing and installation careers in this country.
     * Invest in making all American homes more energy efficient.
       Energy Efficiency is a “low-hanging fruit” because the
       investments made in energy efficiency are so effective in
       reducing carbon pollution emissions, and the return on
       investment is so quick. For every dollar invested in energy
       efficiency technologies, like weatherization and efficient
       light bulbs, energy customers can enjoy up to four dollars
       in savings. Bernie has long been a champion of the
       Weatherization Assistance Program (WAP), the Rural Energy
       for America Program (REAP), and the Low Income Home Energy
       Assistance Program (LIHEAP) that help rural and low-income
       families make their homes more energy efficient and lower
       their energy bills. At a time when we spend on average of
       $350 billion a year on foreign oil, we must take every
       possible step to invest in cheaper energy here in the
       United States. That’s why Bernie recently introduced the
       Residential Energy Savings Act to provide federal loans to
       states to perform energy efficiency updates to provide
       homeowners with valuable energy savings.
    Bernie’s Record:
       Bernie secured $3.2 billion dollars for the Energy
       Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant initiative in the
       stimulus bill, which was consistently rated a top-15 job
       creating program in the years after it was implemented.
       This grant helped to install over 9,500 solar systems and
       perform energy upgrades on approximately 86,000 buildings,
       which is saving consumers many billions of dollars in
       energy costs while also making our air cleaner by reducing
       pollution.
     * Support American workers moving into clean energy jobs. Our
       transition to a clean energy economy has created hundreds
       of thousands of jobs all over the United States, and
       Bernie’s climate change plan will create millions more. But
       we must ensure our transition from fossil fuels to clean
       energy is a just transition for workers. That’s why Bernie
       is introducing the Clean Energy Workers Just Transition
       Act, which provides the most comprehensive package of
       benefits for workers, including extended unemployment
       benefits, education opportunities, health care and job
       training for those transitioning to a career in the clean
       energy industry. Additionally, the bill ensures that
       workers in the clean energy industry will be able to
       organize a union to ensure living wages and safe working
       conditions. It also makes billions of dollars of
       investments in communities most affected by a transition to
       a clean energy future.
     * Invest in an affordable energy storage solution that will
       allow us to fulfill our clean energy needs. Affordable
       energy storage technologies like batteries allow clean
       energy technologies like wind and solar to be integrated
       onto the electric grid – even when the wind is not blowing
       and the sun is not shining. Effective storage systems can
       affordably balance energy supply with demand by capturing
       energy at times when there is excess energy on the system
       for use during hours of high demand. Battery storage
       continues to develop and is becoming increasingly more
       affordable for families all over the country.
     * Build geothermal power plants to create full time
       family-wage jobs for operations, engineering, maintenance,
       and administration. Bernie believes that geothermal energy
       should play an important role in our country’s future
       energy portfolio. Geothermal systems can use the constant
       underground heat to provide heating when it is cool outside
       and to pull heat from buildings when it is warm outside.
       Geothermal energy power plants are less expensive than new
       modern natural gas plants and can be called on to produce
       power when the sun isn’t shining and the wind isn’t
       blowing. Geothermal conserves energy, reduces pollution and
       saves money all at once.
     * Utility-Scale Clean Energy Generation. There are hundreds
       of thousands of roofs with solar panels, but research and
       technology developments have significantly improved
       sustainable energy technologies that are making large-scale
       clean energy an affordable reality. For example,
       advancements in utility-scale concentrated solar allows
       power from the sun to be stored for later use, even when
       the sun is not shining. Most importantly, concentrated
       solar power installations create permanent jobs and provide
       economic support for surrounding communities, which tend to
       be rural.
     * Enable greater consumer choice in energy. Americans should
       have the ability to choose affordable clean technologies
       for their home and businesses. Additionally, the electric
       utilities and fossil fuel industries should not be able to
       get in the way of that choice. Grid modernization
       technologies enable greater consumer choice and ultimately
       utility bill savings by making it easier for families to
       connect clean energy resources to the grid.
     * Begin a moratorium on nuclear power plant license renewals
       in the United States. Bernie believes that solar, wind,
       geothermal power and energy efficiency are proven and more
       cost-effective than nuclear – even without tax incentives –
       and that the toxic waste byproducts of nuclear plants are
       not worth the risks of the technology’s benefit. Especially
       in light of lessons learned from Japan’s Fukushima
       meltdown, Bernie has also raised questions about why the
       federal government invests billions into federal subsidies
       for the nuclear industry. We can have an affordable
       carbon-free, nuclear-free energy system and we must work
       for a safe, healthy future for all Americans.
     * Provide global clean energy funding to vulnerable
       countries. The United States should lead the international
       community in funding technology development and deployment
       solutions for the most vulnerable developing countries as
       part of any international agreement.

      Revolutionize our Electric and Transportation Infrastructure

   In the United States, the transportation sector accounts for
   about 26 percent of carbon pollution emissions. That’s the
   second largest contribution to our total carbon emissions after
   the electricity sector, which accounts for about 31 percent.

   When we built out our state-of-the-art rail system in the early
   1860’s we became global leaders. But now our rail system pales
   in comparison to Japan, Germany and even China in terms of our
   high-speed passenger and cargo rail systems. Bernie will invest
   in interstate and intercity high-speed rail systems to bring
   people and commodities to their destinations more efficiently
   to save time and money.

   We must also invest in electric vehicle charging
   infrastructure, just as we built an interstate highway system
   in the 1950s and 1960s. Many customers are interested in moving
   beyond oil toward an electric car, but the concerns of cost and
   whether there will be access to a charging station prevent many
   people from being able to choose this low-carbon option.

   Both our transportation and electricity infrastructures must be
   updated. We still have electric lines and bridges that were
   built around the time Thomas Edison invented the light bulb.
   Modernizing the electrical grid helps balance higher amounts of
   clean energy, decreases outages and improves efficiency.

   Bernie believes that infrastructure investments can create jobs
   and lead to a cleaner future.

  As president, Bernie will:

     * Build electric vehicle charging stations. In a country
       where nearly 30 percent of carbon pollution emissions come
       from the transportation sector, it is imperative that we
       end our dependence on gasoline. Vehicles that run on
       electricity are more efficient than internal combustion
       engines and can be powered with renewable energy resources
       like wind and solar. We need to support the development of
       vehicle charging stations that will allow us to drive
       cleanly and sustainably.
     * Build high-speed passenger and cargo rail. Our nation’s
       rail system is largely obsolete, even though our
       energy-efficient railroads move more freight than ever, and
       Amtrak’s ridership has never been higher. While Amtrak’s
       fastest train travels at an average speed of just 65 mph,
       high-speed rail now crisscrosses most of Europe, Japan,
       Taiwan, South Korea and China with trains that run up to
       200 mph. Once we have a state-of-the-art rail system, we
       will not only be able to move passengers and cargo faster
       and more efficiently, we will make significant cuts in
       carbon pollution emissions that cause climate change and
       create millions of permanent family-wage jobs for
       electricians, pipe fitters and sheet-metal workers.
    Bernie’s Record:
       Bernie introduced the Rebuild America Act to invest $75
       billion to improve rail so America can begin to catch up
       with the rest of the world.
     * Make our cities more walkable and take more cars off the
       road. Public transit can move more people in fewer
       vehicles, which is good for clean air and reducing carbon
       pollution emissions. Public transportation saves enough
       electricity to power nearly 5 million homes in the United
       States. Despite the potential for public transit and biking
       to save Americans money and reduce emissions, the United
       States has a long way to go to make the roads safe for
       those who choose these alternative modes of transportation.
     * Update and modernize the energy grid. Some of our grid
       infrastructure has not been updated since it was first
       built in the 1920s and 1930s. This causes hundreds of
       avoidable power failures and interruptions each year.
       Today, power failures cost the economy $164 billion
       annually, stemming from impacts like lost productivity and
       wasted food. Those costs are only expected to increase as
       climate change causes more extreme weather, which can knock
       the power out. Additionally, our grid is highly centralized
       and therefore susceptible to cyber and physical attacks.
       Technology development in clean energy resources and
       electric grid improvements have enabled “smart”
       technologies, programs and policies to create a safer, more
       sustainable energy system. The “smart grid” offers real
       benefits for consumers and the environment.

    Bernie’s Record:

   Bernie introduced the Rebuild America Act, which would invest
   $10 billion a year for power transmission, distribution and
   modernization projects that will improve the reliability and
   resiliency of our ever more complex electrical grid. The bill
   will also help increase access to broadband internet, which can
   also enable better, safer and more reliable electrical service.

  Lead the International Community to Solve Climate Change and Prevent
                        International Conflict.

   Climate change is not just an “environmental issue,” but a
   global security issue as well. Climate change is an
   international crisis that threatens vulnerable communities all
   over the world.

   The CIA and the Department of Defense both say that climate
   change is one of the great security issues facing this planet.
   As we see more and more drought, as people around the world are
   unable to grow the food they need to survive, people will
   migrate for survival. Instability can cause international
   conflict.

   The United States must lead the world by working with China,
   Russia, India and the rest of the international community to
   transform our energy system away from fossil fuels toward
   energy efficiency and sustainable energy. We need a global
   commitment to reduce carbon pollution emissions.

   The U.S. needs to lead the international community in the fight
   against climate change to maintain American economic strength
   and global security.

   The United States has a unique opportunity to lead the
   international community in innovating strategies to cut climate
   pollution to avoid the most devastating damage of global
   climate change and adapt to the impacts that we cannot avoid.
   Our progress in reducing pollution levels over the last ten
   years has given us the credibility to demand that major
   developing nations also take bold action. In the past year, we
   have seen historic new commitments from countries like China
   and India who are for the first time putting forth their own
   aggressive climate agendas.

  As president, Bernie will:

     * Convene a climate summit with the world’s best engineers,
       climate scientists, policy experts, activists and
       indigenous communities in his first 100 days. The United
       Nations Paris climate talks in December are an important
       milestone toward solving climate change, but even
       optimistic outcomes of these talks will not put the world
       on the path needed to avoid the most catastrophic results
       of climate change. We must think beyond Paris. In the first
       100 days of Bernie’s Presidency, he will convene a summit
       of the world’s best climate experts to chart a course
       toward the healthy future we all want for our families and
       communities.
     * Lead countries in cutting climate change. Climate change is
       the greatest global challenge, and must be met with global
       solutions. The United States has contributed greatly to
       climate change, but also has the greatest opportunity and
       know-how to lead in implementing climate change solutions.
       The argument that we shouldn’t act until other countries do
       is falling by the wayside as China, India and many other
       countries have come to the table with initial commitments
       to take significant action to solve climate change.
     * Plan for peace to avoid international climate-fueled
       conflict. Changes in rainfall patterns, higher temperatures
       and more frequent natural disasters such as droughts and
       flooding due to climate change pose a direct threat to our
       global food and energy supply. In the United States, this
       could mean higher food and energy prices. In some
       developing countries, the effects could be even worse, and
       lead to temporary or more permanent situations where not
       enough food or water is available for everyone. This has
       the potential to result in an international climate-fueled
       conflict. Bernie believes that we must plan for peace now
       in order to prepare for this sort of dire conflict that is
       already beginning to unfold in parts of the world.
    [43]Racial Justice
    [44]A Living Wage

Are you ready?

