Bernie Sanders' Position on the Clean Power Plan

His proposals would require withdrawing the rule and would increase
its legal vulnerability

   BernieSanders In an interview with Grist last week,
   Presidential candidate Bernie Sanders provided details about
   his views on the Clean Power Plan, the Obama administration's
   rule to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from existing power
   plants.  Sanders said two things of note: the first is that he
   would change the CPP to increase incentives for renewable
   fuels; the second is that he would change the rule to regulate
   methane emissions as well as carbon dioxide.    These changes
   are presumably part of Sanders' overall climate plan, which
   includes imposing a carbon tax on emitters.

   The odds of getting a carbon tax through Congress don't seem
   high.  But as President, Sanders would have executive authority
   to make changes to the currently finalized Clean Power Plan,
   presumably by withdrawing it, reissuing a new proposed rule,
   putting it through the required notice and comment period and
   then finalizing it in response to the comments.  It's an
   interesting position for Sanders to take:  on the one hand, he
   wants to make the Clean Power Plan more ambitious.  Being more
   ambitious on climate policy than President Obama and,
   presumably, than Hilary Clinton (who has said she'll defend the
   Clean Power Plan), is a not surprising strategy  for him (and
   makes clear that he ‘s not a single issue candidate).  But the
   strategy also raises pretty starkly the dilemma raised by a
   strategy that elevates principle over pragmatism.  Revising the
   Clean Power Plan would cause significant delay in its
   implementation simply because of the procedural requirements
   of notice and comment (ignoring for a moment the increased
   controversy it would ignite against an already controversial
   plan).  And delay in reducing greenhouse gas emissions is
   problematic on at least two fronts: the longer we delay
   implementation, the more expensive reductions become, and delay
   makes it more difficult to achieve our Paris commitment to
   achieve 26 to 28 percent reductions in our emissions by 2025.
   Sanders would sacrifice these practicalities to get greater
   reductions in emissions over the long run. He would also
   probably lose the D.C. Circuit panel of judges currently
   hearing legal challenges to the CPP, a panel that includes
   at least two judges likely to accord the administration
   significant deference in its choice about how to regulate
   greenhouse gases under the Clean Air Act.

   Sanders' changes would also almost certainly mean more legal
   vulnerability for the Clean Power Plan, especially his proposal
   to regulate methane emissions through the Plan.  Here's why.
   The CPP, issued under Section 111d of the Clean Air Act and
   explained in much more detail here, requires EPA to issue
   emissions guidelines to states to regulate existing sources
   using the "best system of emission reduction".  EPA's CPP does
   so for electric power plants by developing guidelines for
   electric power plants that set an overall amount by which each
   state must reduce its greenhouse gases.  What is controversial
   about EPA plan is that in setting the rates, EPA determined
   the state "budgets" by using not just the reductions that could
   be achieved from installing traditional controls placed on
   individual power plants, which is a more traditional way of
   regulating.  EPA also included  emissions reductions states
   could achieve by having its electricity sector switch from
   using coal to natural gas and by having the electricity sector
   increase its reliance on renewable and nuclear energy.  The
   latter two elements go "beyond the fence line" of the power
   plants and it is this "beyond the fence line" element of the
   CPP that is the subject of much of the legal challenge to it.
   Opponents argue that EPA should only be requiring states to
   reduce emissions based on the reductions it could achieve by
   regulating individual power plants.  Such an approach would
   achieve far fewer reductions than the Obama CPP.

   One of Sanders' proposals - to increase the incentives for
   renewable energy by extending the Clean Energy Incentive
   Program– should probably not alter the legal vulnerability of
   the current plan.  The program provides extra credit to states
   during the early years of the CPP and Sanders would extend the
   program to 2030.

   But the second of Sanders' proposals - to use the CPP to
   regulate methane emissions, would extend the CPP far "beyond
   the fence line," to include the transport (and possibly the
   extraction) of natural gas through pipelines.  The CPP's legal
   defense of the current CPP is based on an important factual
   premise: that the electricity system is one giant machine and
   therefore a "system" under the phraseology of Section 111d.
   Sanders' proposal is apparently to also regulate emissions
   caused by leaks in the  the vast system of natural gas
   pipelines in the country that bring natural gas to power
   plants. It may extend even further to include methane released
   from hydrofracking, though it is unclear from Sanders'
   statements if he means to be so inclusive.   Sanders is clearly
   focused here on public opposition to fracking and worries about
   methane leaks, exacerbated by the recent fiasco involving a
   massive methane leak from a Southern California Edison storage
   site.  And methane is a potent greenhouse gas, more than 20
   times more intense than carbon dioxide.  But it is a curious
   choice to use the Clean Power Plan, focused on emissions from
   the electricity sector, to go after methane emissions from the
   natural gas sector.  The CPP would then stray so far past the
   fence line that even judges who are predisposed to defer to EPA
   rulemaking might refuse to do so.  Moreover, the Obama
   Administration has already issued proposed rules to regulate
   methane emissions from the oil and gas sector under the Clean
   Air Act (rules that have been criticized by some
   environmentalists as too weak for focusing on new sources,
   though Obama has also moved to reduce methane leaks from
   existing sources on public lands).  Why Sanders wants to use
   the CPP to do so - delaying its implementation and increasing
   its legal vulnerability - is unclear.
