Hillary Clinton unveils her plan to make US 'clean energy superpower'

   Presidential hopeful builds on Keystone pipeline stance to
   outline agenda to create climate change compact with Canada and
   Mexico and incentivize clean energy

   Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton speaks in the
   gymnasium of Moulton Elementary School in Des Moines, Iowa, on
   Tuesday.

   Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton said her plan
   would invest in grid security and resilience as well as
   promote measures to reduce emissions. Photograph: Brian
   Frank/Reuters

   Sabrina Siddiqui in Washington

   One day after announcing her opposition to the controversial
   Keystone pipeline, Hillary Clinton unveiled a more
   comprehensive agenda for the US energy infrastructure that
   seeks to transform the US into the clean energy superpower of
   the 21st century.

   The Democratic presidential candidate detailed her proposals on
   Wednesday in both a blogpost on Medium and a fact sheet
   distributed by Clinton's campaign.

   Clinton plan calls for the existing energy infrastructure in
   the US to be modernized through a series of steps, such as
   repairing or replacing oil and gas pipelines that are outdated
   and risk both oil and methane leaks and other hazardous
   accidents.

   The flaws highlighted by Clinton in the country's energy
   infrastructure, including pipeline spills, rail car explosions,
   and the exposure to cyber-attacks, mirror the findings of the
   first-ever quadrennial energy review conducted by the Obama
   administration and released in April.

   In addition to exposing the vulnerabilities in energy
   transmission, storage and distribution infrastructure, the
   review produced recommendations that included accelerating
   pipeline replacement, enhancing maintenance programs for
   natural gas distribution systems, and developing a more modern
   electric grid.

   Clinton said her plan would invest in grid security and
   resilience, and create a threat assessment team to protect
   against cyber-attack through improved coordination.

   Citing challenges that extend across the borders of Canada and
   Mexico, Clinton also said she would immediately begin
   negotiations with both nations, if elected president, to forge
   a North American climate compact with the purpose of producing
   shared targets and accountability measures to reduce greenhouse
   gas emissions and cut energy costs.

   Such a pact, Clinton wrote, would ensure that all three
   countries demonstrate a commitment to climate action, as well
   as create certainty for investors and confidence in the
   future of our climate, so we can all marshal resources equal to
   the challenges we face.

   Related: With Clinton and the Pope on board, the climate
   movement has wind in its sails. Bill McKibben

   Environmental activists broadly approved of Clinton plan,
   while welcoming the series of recent steps taken by the former
   secretary of state with respect to energy policy - such as her
   opposition to Keystone.

   Climatologist Michael Mann, director of the Penn State Earth
   System Science Center, described Clinton plan as very good
   overall while singling out her emphasis on building upon the
   successes of the Obama administration - namely the
   Environmental Protection Agency new rules to reduce
   greenhouse gas emissions, known as the clean power plan.

   He also praised her outlined commitment to incentivizing clean
   energy, pricing carbon emissions, and working with
   international partners in a coordinated effort to lower carbon
   emissions.

   Mann nonetheless maintained that Clinton plan was somewhat
   conservative with respect to fossil fuel subsidies.

   Clinton indicates that she is open to the additional leasing
   of public lands to fossil fuel companies, which - given the
   cheap nature of those leases - is effectively a subsidy to
   fossil fuel interests, he said, while acknowledging that
   Clinton said she wanted to ensure taxpayers get a fair deal.

   The devil is in the details here, Mann said. A fair deal
   would mean charging fossil fuel companies for the damage that
   is being done by the additional burning of fossil fuels in the
   form of climate change and its costly impact. Even the fossil
   fuel industry estimates that to be least $60 per ton of carbon
   burned.

   Tiernan Sittenfeld, the senior vice-president of government
   affairs of the left-leaning League of Conservation Voters, said
   she was pleased with what Clinton had offered thus far and is
   optimistic about what is yet to come.

   Overall, we're increasingly excited about her leadership on
   clean energy and climate change, she said.

   Related: Hillary Clinton opposes Keystone, but other
   pipelines have forged ahead

   Clinton's new plan, her opposition to both Keystone and Arctic
   drilling, as well as the renewable energy proposal she rolled
   out in July, Sittenfeld said, were all evidence of a ramp-up
   that placed the Democratic frontrunner squarely at odds with
   her Republicans opponents.

   If you think about the fact that protecting the environment
   used to be such a source of bipartisan agreement and now pretty
   much every single Republican candidate for president wants to
   permanently block the clean power plan … climate deniers are
   running rampant amongst the Republicans running for president,
   she said. It's pretty disgraceful, unfortunately.

   Environmental groups were especially jubilant on Tuesday, when
   Clinton finally made clear that she opposed the controversial
   Keystone pipeline - after months of declining to take a
   position.
   
   I think it is imperative that we look at the Keystone pipeline
   as what I believe it is, a distraction from the important work
   we have to do to combat climate change, and unfortunately from
   my perspective one that interferes with our ability to move
   forward to deal with all the other issues, Clinton said during
   a campaign stop in Des Moines, Iowa. Therefore, I oppose it.
   And I oppose It because I don't think it's in the best interest
   of what we need to do to combat climate change.

   She elaborated on her stance in the Medium post Wednesday,
   writing: We shouldn't be building a pipeline dedicated to
   moving North America dirtiest fuel through our communities .

   The Keystone announcement earned immediate rebukes from
   Clinton's Republican rivals - such as former Florida governor
   Jeb Bush, who accused Clinton of favoring environmental
   extremists over US jobs.

   Reviews have suggested the hotly debated pipeline would
   not, in fact, result in a job-creating bonanza.

   The State Department estimated that only 35 permanent positions
   would be created, while jobs for roughly 3,900 workers required
   to build the pipeline would last for just a year. Estimates
   have also varied dramatically for the indirect jobs that
   Keystone might add, and been lowered amid a drop in oil prices
   that has reduced the economic viability of further tar sands
   expansion.

   Among the Republican presidential hopefuls, Marco Rubio is one
   of the few to lay out his own energy agenda. The Florida
   senator pledged earlier this month to immediately block the
   Obama administration's rules on reducing greenhouse gas
   emissions and also advocated for lifting a federal ban on crude
   oil exports.

   Clinton said last week she would support reversing the
   40-year ban only if there were concessions from the oil and gas
   industry toward cleaner energy.

   I am not against it under all circumstances but I have not yet
   seen any legislation introduced that would strike the right
   balance, in my perspective, Clinton told reporters in New
   Hampshire.
