Why President Trump Would Likely Honor A Paris Climate Deal And The
EPA's Clean Power Plan

   by Joe Romm Aug 19, 2015 10:18 am

   The establishment has now accepted the reality that Donald
   Trump could win the GOP nomination - and could even possibly …
   become the next president of the United States. Memo To Self:
   Adjust meds.

   Yet while narcissistic showman Trump has a long history of
   saying nonsensical things about climate change and clean
   energy, narcissistic President Trump is exceedingly unlikely to
   blow up any global climate agreement that comes out of Paris
   for two big reasons.

   First, the Paris accord is almost certain to be a very good
   deal for us (as I discussed here), and Trump sees himself
   as a great deal-maker above all else. Second, Trump understands
   the value of "brand" - and nothing would ruin his brand (or
   this country's) more permanently than to be the guy (or
   country) who killed the world's best (and maybe only) chance of
   getting onto a path that could avoid catastrophic warming and
   centuries of misery for billions of people.

   If, as Trump said Sunday, he will not torch the Iranian
   nuclear deal, then he isn't going to burn any Paris accord -
   and that means he'd have to honor the EPA's Clean Power Plan,
   since that is essential to the U.S. side of the deal.

   Trump Is For Real
   Let's take all of these points in order. First, the
   establishment spoke through one of its major mouthpieces -
   Bloomberg Politics Managing Editor Mark Halperin, and author of
   best-selling campaign books like Game Change:

     We've reached a turning point with Trump, the major
     establishment campaigns of both parties now think Trump
     could win Iowa, and most of them think he could win the
     nomination, and a significant number think he could win the
     White House.

   Yes, seriously. Here is the segment from "Morning Joe" on MSNBC
   Monday:

   Trump Spouts Nonsense on Climate and Clean Energy

   Second, based strictly on what's he's said, a President Trump
   would not be good for the climate. Trump comments have been
   indistinguishable from other high-profile conservative
   candidates who deny climate science, and oppose clean energy -
   as ClimateProgress has detailed in many posts over the years,
   most recently "It Snowed Once And Other Things Donald Trump
   Thinks Prove Global Warming Is A Hoax."

   As someone who has been highly critical of Trump nonsense for
   a long time, I am not making any excuses for the
   anti-scientific, pro-pollution ideas he has been spreading. But
   it remains the case that conservative candidates for higher
   office say a lot of nonsensical things - the difference with
   Trump, at least right now, is that he knows this and even
   admits that much of what he's said is bluster.

   For instance, we and others (rightly) criticize Trump for
   the bizarre conspiracy theory he tweeted in 2012:

     The concept of global warming was created by and for the
     Chinese in order to make U.S. manufacturing non-competitive.

     - Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) November 6, 2012

   Seriously? Actually, no. When CNN's Jake Tapper read this tweet
   to Trump in a late June interview, Trump admitted he was
   NOT serious (mostly):

     TRUMP: Well of course I'm being sarcastic you know…
     TAPPER: That's not to be taken seriously?
     TRUMP: No it's a little bit serious, there's a little bit of
     seriousness there. Look, we are restricting our factories
     much more than China, I go to China. They have factories
     that are much more competitive, I'm not saying friendly, but
     they are certainly not environmentally friendly. I'm a huge
     believer in clean air, I'm not a huge believer in the global
     warming phenomenon.

   In short, he's admitting the tweet was pure B.S., which is
   quite a concession from a guy who never retracts or apologizes
   for anything. So what happens when Tapper presses him on the
   scientific reality of global warming?

     TAPPER: But the overwhelming majority of scientists say it's
     real and it's manmade and things are happening -
     TRUMP: Oh there could be some manmade to - I'm not saying
     that there's zero- but not nearly to the extent- when Obama
     gets up said it's the number one problem in our country, and
     if it is, why is that we have to do our and clean up our
     factories now and China does not have to do it for another 30
     or 35 years in their wonderful agreement, you know our
     wonderful negotiators.
     They have much smarter, much better negotiators than we do,
     it's really as simple as that. We do not have - and that's
     part of the reason I'm doing this.
     TAPPER: Because you are the man who wrote "The Art of The
     Deal"
     TRUMP: I did write "The Art of the Deal" in all fairness.

   That's an interesting pivot from a guy who has called the whole
   thing a hoax. Trump (correctly) understands that most of what
   politicians say on the issues does not matter to voters (see
   below). This allows him to focus on being as entertaining and
   provocative as possible for the public, but then retreating to
   pragmatism - his supposedly superior deal-making skills -
   whenever pressed on the facts by the media.
   Trump_the_art_of_the_deal

   CREDIT: Wikipedia

   For the record, Trump has his facts dead wrong about the China
   deal, or he may even know this is B.S. as well. Either way, the
   Chinese "wonderful agreement" to peak CO2 emissions by 2030,
   leads directly to their pledge to peak in coal consumption
   by 2020. Moreover, in that agreement, the U.S. got the Chinese
   to make clear they were going to beat the 2030 target - and as
   we reported last month, it's now a widely held view in the
   Beijing climate community that China will peak its CO2
   emissions around 2025.

   Further, China may well have peaked/plateaued in coal already,
   and it is beating all of their already world-beating renewable
   energy targets. None of this is because they are better
   negotiators - but because they understand that the reality of
   climate change means clean energy is going to be the biggest
   set of job creating industries this century.

   None of this excuses Trump endless stream of nonsensical
   statements. It's only to say that they don't tell you what he
   would do as president because even he knows a lot of it is
   nonsense.

   Trump is ALL About the Deal

   Trump is selling himself as a dealmaker - one who understands
   that the policy positions candidates put out now are largely
   irrelevant to what they would do as president.

   The Washington Post's political weblog, "The Fix," spelled that
   out in a Sunday column, "Donald Trump surprisingly savvy
   analysis of American politics." The piece analyzed Trump
   response to one Iowa reporter who said to him, "a lot of voters
   are saying that they really want to see your policies now."

   Trump explained policy statements are over-rated in the real
   world:

     "You know, when you put out policy, like a 14-point plan? A
     lot of times in the first hour of negotiation, that 14-point
     plan goes astray, but you may end up with a better deal.
     That's the way it works. That's the way really life works.
     When I do a deal, I don't say, ‘Oh, here's 14 points.' I got
     out and do it. I don't sit down and talk about 14 points."

   He ends by saying, "I know the press wants it. I don't think
   the people care. I think they trust me. I think they know I'm
   going to make good deals for them." The Washington Post then
   explains why, "There's an enormous amount of insight in that
   statement, about both Trump and about politics."

   Trump isn't leading the GOP field on the basis of policy
   statements, political experience, or carefully crafted,
   poll-tested lines. Obviously.

   Trump is running on the exact opposite, his success as a
   billionaire dealmaker who uses bluster, showmanship, and
   negotiating skills to get what he wants. He's made clear that
   even on matters of serious ideological purity for conservatives
   such as the Iran nuclear deal, he is still going to be a
   flexible deal-maker.

   Trump told Meet The Press Sunday: "I've heard a lot of people
   say, 'We are going to rip up the deal.' It's very tough to do
   when you say, ‘Rip up a deal'." He notes Iran would have
   already gotten much of what it wanted - tens of billions of
   dollars in frozen assets released.

     "I buy contracts where people screwed up and they have bad
     contracts. But I'm really good at looking at a contract and
     finding things within a contract that, even if they are bad,
     I would police that contract so tough that they don't have a
     chance. As bad as the contract is, I will be so tough on
     that contract."

   That actually makes sense - certainly more sense than what the
   other "serious" GOP candidates have been saying. Indeed, as
   HuffPost notes, all of them but Jeb have said they would
   torch the Iran deal on becoming President.

   Trump Would Honor Paris Climate Deal And EPA's Clean Power Plan

   If Trump will not rip up the Iranian deal, he certainly isn't
   going to rip up any deal to come out of Paris. First, as the
   independent analytical team at Climate Action Tracker (CAT)
   put it, "The U.S. climate plans are at the least ambitious
   end of what would be a fair contribution."

   But the U.S. commitment was enough to get the "wonderful deal"
   with China that, despite Trump blinkered sarcasm, was a true
   game-changer. That deal broke the long-standing logjam in
   international negotiations between developed and developing
   nations - resulting in a flood of commitments from other
   countries.

   If there is a breakthrough climate deal in Paris in December,
   it will be in no small measure because of the U.S.-China deal.
   Paris will not "solve" the climate crisis - by historical
   design, it cannot put us directly on the path to 2°C. But it
   will enable subsequent agreements to do so and avoid some of
   the most catastrophic impacts.

   If there were a Paris deal and the United States simply torched
   it, however, then President Trump and the United States will be
   blamed for whatever catastrophic climate change subsequently
   occurs. We would be the ones who ripped the tourniquet off that
   had stanched the bleeding.

   A brand-obsessed deal-maker is not going to invite permanent
   brand destruction and historical notoriety of the kind enjoyed
   by leaders like Neville Chamberlain and Herbert Hoover - all to
   destroy a global deal that requires minimal effort to fulfill.

   Just as Obama's CO2 pledge for Paris is the least the United
   States can do, the Clean Power Plan (CPP), which enables the
   pledge to be met, is also the minimum the United States can
   do.

   By the time anyone becomes president in 2017, it will be even
   more obvious that climate change is a dire problem, and also
   more obvious that meeting the CPP state targets is pretty
   straightforward.

   I'm not saying Trump would be a good president for climate
   change or clean energy. There is no evidence of that in any of
   his buffoonish words (though he may well be the most
   progressive of GOP candidates). And anyway, after a quarter
   century of dawdling, we need a Churchill right now, not a P.T.
   Barnum.

   But whatever else one can say about Trump, he doesn't blow up
   good deals, especially ones critical to maintaining his
   personal brand.